---
title: "About Me"
description: ""
date: 2017-09-05T12:42:22-05:00
---

Hi! I'm currently a Software Engineer at Amazon, previously a Data
Scientist at ExxonMobil, and before that, a Master's
student/researcher at the Univerity of Tulsa advised by [Dr. Sandip
Sen](http://www.ens.utulsa.edu/~sandip/).

I'm primarily interested in enhancing the developer experience, so
you'll probably see a lot of my writings and packages focused on that
stuff specifically. I use a lot of Python (and in fact, I help
maintain the tools that build Python applications at Amazon and AWS)
but I've worked in 10+ languages in the past and don't plan on
sticking to just those.

That's enough about me. What I'd really like to talk about right now
is my family's cats. I wrote this ages ago so technically these are my
parent's cats but still I love them very much so they get to keep this
section of the "About Me."

One is a grey striped tabby cat named Thor
(pictured left), and the other is a small ragdoll cat named Robby (on
the right, short for ``Dread Cat Roberts'').

<img src="/photos/thor-1.jpg" style="border: 2px solid #BBB; width:
200px; display: inline; float: left; margin: 5px;"> Cats are probably
the cutest animals in the world. They are so cute and amazing, even
when they are in murder mode. So, if you're planning on getting a cat,
there are probably a few things that you need to know.

First, it's pretty cute when they're kittens and they bite your hand
and all, but it hurts when their teeth get sharp. If I hold my hand
outstretched, in front of the cats now, it triggers them to go into
psycho killer mode and attack the hand, probably because they can
shred my arm with their legs while tearing my hand apart. Still cute
tho, so do whatever you like.  <img src="/photos/robby-1.jpg"
style="border: 2px solid #BBB; width: 200px; display: inline; float:
right; margin: 5px;">

Second, if you stare at them with big eyes, that makes them go into
psycho killer mode too. It's pretty cute and cats love to go into
psycho killer mode, so I'd recommend it.

Finally, somebody told me once that cats get fat if you leave food
around for them. The cat definition of fat must be totally different
from the dog definition because we've been feeding ours like that for
years and both still look great. We gave our beagle one of those
automatic dog food dispensers one time and they exploded in like a
week or something.

And finally finally, there's something right below Robby in the
picture on the right and I have no idea what it is. It looks like a
snake or something, but it probably isn't because I don't remember a
snake being in that picture. After zooming in a bit, though, it looks
like a ball with a shadow or something. No idea where that ball is now.

But Thor is definitely closer to the killer cat type cat. Ragdolls are
apparently supposed to be pretty docile, and while Robby isn't docile,
he does tolerate being held.
