---
title: "A deeper dive on the 4% rule"
date: 2024-01-15
draft: false
markup: 'mmark'
---

## tl;dr

There's a common method for calculating how much you need to retire
called the 4% rule; but blindly trusting some rule can make it hard to
really understand what assumptions were made in generating that
rule.

I've recently written up an analytical mathematical model that
accounts for both interest rates and inflation in the context of
calculating retirement annuities. I'm going to talk a bit about how
some of these basic rules actually derive their numbers, how it
applies to this extension, and what we can learn from using these
simple analytical tools.

This article has a bit of math in it, but nothing beyond algebra
complexity.

## Context

<link rel="stylesheet" href="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/katex@0.16.9/dist/katex.min.css" integrity="sha384-n8MVd4RsNIU0tAv4ct0nTaAbDJwPJzDEaqSD1odI+WdtXRGWt2kTvGFasHpSy3SV" crossorigin="anonymous">
<script defer src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/katex@0.16.9/dist/katex.min.js" integrity="sha384-XjKyOOlGwcjNTAIQHIpgOno0Hl1YQqzUOEleOLALmuqehneUG+vnGctmUb0ZY0l8" crossorigin="anonymous"></script>
<script defer src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/katex@0.16.9/dist/contrib/auto-render.min.js" integrity="sha384-+VBxd3r6XgURycqtZ117nYw44OOcIax56Z4dCRWbxyPt0Koah1uHoK0o4+/RRE05" crossorigin="anonymous"></script>
<script>
    document.addEventListener("DOMContentLoaded", function() {
        document.body.innerHTML = document.body.innerHTML.replace(/\\\$/g, '<span>$</span>');
        renderMathInElement(document.body, {
          // customised options
          // • auto-render specific keys, e.g.:
          delimiters: [
              {left: '$$', right: '$$', display: true},
              {left: '$', right: '$', display: false},
              {left: '\\(', right: '\\)', display: true},
              {left: '\\[', right: '\\]', display: true}
          ],
          // • rendering keys, e.g.:
          throwOnError : false
        });
    });
</script>

Over the past decade, there's been quite a bit of interest in the
[Financial Independence, Retire
Early](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FIRE_movement) movement, where
one saves money aggressively in order to have enough saved wealth to
retire early.

This post was motivated by [a comment in a Reddit thread on what the
appropriate FIRE number
is](https://www.reddit.com/r/Fire/comments/196igwp/the_fire_number/):

> You're over complicating this. Just use that range [25x-35x yearly
> expenses]. Go for that mark. Over time, build the life you want to
> retire to. And over time, re-total your yearly expenses and adjust
> your mark as needed.

*NOTE*: The "25x-35x yearly expenses" informally refers to the [4%
rule](https://www.bankrate.com/retirement/what-is-the-4-percent-rule/):
If you have some amount of wealth saved, $P$, then by withdrawing 4%
of $P$ annually, adjusted for inflation, under basic assumptions of
growth in the investment, you should be able to survive on that
amount for 30 years.

I agree and disagree with this comment. To some extent -- yes,
overcomplicating retirement, especially for those who aren't very
familiar with math or finance, is likely going to be about as
inaccurate as the 4% rule. The best tool for reducing inaccuracy is to
simply wait and recalculate using real data.

On the other hand, blindly trusting such metrics and not considering
their limitations/assumptions underestimates the complexity of
financial planning and how hard it is to forecast a retirement plan
over the course of 30+ years.

Nonetheless, building a complete model that captures all possible
variables (as the above post was slowly developing into) is going to
be both infeasible and unrealistic. Instead, we can evaluate the
merits of the 4% method through the lens of some simple mathematical
models.

This isn't any type of financial advice or even expert financial
analysis; I'm writing this more from the interest in some of the math
rather than coming in as an expert on this subject. I wouldn't reuse
much of anything I write here in your own planning unless you know
what you're doing, in which case you'll be smart enough to know not to
use this!

## The payout annuity model

One strategy for understanding the implications of some rule of thumb
is to analyze it through the lens of a simple, explanatory model. The
advantage of this analysis is that analytical models often expose
simple relationships that give us general and widely applicable
insights, as well as allowing us to adapt such rules to new
circumstances.

We're going to start with a very basic model of calculating retirement
income, [payout
annuities](https://ua.pressbooks.pub/collegealgebraformanagerialscience/chapter/8-3-payout-annuities/). Our
model is simplistic: in plain English, we're going to assume that we
start retirement with some amount of money spread across a number of
investments, and a series of fixed payments (annuities) where we will
gradually withdraw money from that investment account. In math terms:

1. We are going to start out with some initial amount of money in our
   investment account, $P$.
2. Every time period, we are going to withdraw $W$ from the account
   for $T$ time periods;
3. Our original investment is going to grow by some interest rate $r$ every
   time period as well.

The choice of granularity for our time period is arbitrary, but a
general rule of thumb is that if you want to work on a month scale,
then you would take your annual interest rate $r$ and divide it by 12.

Interestingly under these constraints, payout annuities are identical
in formulation to calculation of a fixed payment for a loan in
reverse: You're starting out with a beginning balance that grows at a
certain rate, and you'd like to calculate a fixed withdrawal rate such
that, in $t$ months, your final balance is 0\$.

As such, you can actually use the same formulas to estimate your
needed investment balance. Deriving a number is fairly simple: Let
$P_t$ be the total amount of money in your account at time $t$. We know that:

1. $P_0 = P$, i.e., your starting money is the amount of money you've
   got in your investment accounts;
2. $P_T = 0$, i.e., at the end of your retirement, you're going to
   have a 0\$ balance, and;
3. $P_t = (1+r) P_{t-1} - W, 0\le t\leq T$; in other words, during
   each pay period, your investment grows by $1+r$ and loses a
   constant $W$.

What we'd like to do for is solve for $P$; to do so we're going to
expand $P_T$ until all of the recursive $P_t$ terms have disappeared.

$$
\begin{aligned}
  P_T &= 0 = (1+r) P_{T-1} - W \\\\
      &= (1+r) ((1 + r)P_{T-2} - W) - W \\\\
      &= (1+r)^2 P_{T-2} - (1+r) W - W
      & ... \\\\
      &= (1+r)^T P - \sum_{t=0}^{T-1} (1+r)^t W
\end{aligned}
$$

You may recognize that $\sum_{t=1}^T (1+r)^t W$ is a finite geometric
series; fortunately when $r\neq 0$ we know that this sum is equivalent
to:

$$\sum_{t=0}^{T-1} (1+r)^t W = W\frac{1-(1+r)^T}{-r}$$

By substituting in these terms, we can eliminate the summations and get:

$$P_T = 0 = (1-r)^T P - W \frac{1-(1+r)^T}{1 - (1+r)}$$

Since we're interested in calculating $P$ directly, we can do some
basic algebra to arrive at:

$$P = - W \frac{1-(1+r)^T}{(1 - (1+r))(1 + r)^T}$$

For those using Excel, this is actually identical to the [Present Value
function](https://www.investopedia.com/ask/answers/040315/how-do-you-calculate-present-value-excel.asp):

$$P = \text{PV}(r, T, W)$$

### Are payout annuities realistic?

To understand what payout annuities calculate, let's try out a toy
example: I want to calculate the amount I would need for retirement
for $T=30$, $W=72000$, and $r=10\\%$, the [approximate average return
rate of the S&P
500](https://www.investopedia.com/ask/answers/042415/what-average-annual-return-sp-500.asp). In
other words, I'm withdrawing \\$72,000 per year which translates to
actually spending \\$57,600 per year and allocating \$14,400 in
capital gains taxes.

If I wanted to start out withdrawing \\$72,000 from my investment
account starting at retirement, the amount of money I'd need according
to the 4% rule is \\$1.8M. Plugging the same numbers into our PV formula:

$$ P = \text{PV}(10\\%, 30, 72000) = 678,737.84 $$

In other words, our payout annuities and the 4% rule estimate a
difference of over \\$1 million dollars! Why is there such a
difference?

The major issue is our choice of interest rate. 10\% may be the
average growth of the S&P 500, but any real retirement portfolio is
likely going to be much more diversified to curb against
risk. Investments that track the market like this are likely to be
highly variable -- if you started retirement in 2022 for example, your
portfolio could have decreased in value by as much as 20%. The impact
of pulling \\$72,000 then would take off years from your retirement
plan. Thus, if you're using a simpler model that assumes a constant
return, you'll likely need to choose a rate of return much lower than
your actual returns to account for that risk.

The second major issue in payout annuities is the inflation
factor. Suppose, for example, that the dollar decreases in value by an
inflation rate of about 2\% per year. The \\$72,000 that you're
withdrawing in 2054 would be worth about \\$39,749 in 2024 dollars,
meaning that your quality of life is decreasing significantly
year-by-year.

The 4\% rule's number seems reasonable, though -- so let's instead fix
$P=1.8\text{M}$ and instead try to solve for $r$ instead; that is,
what interest rate does payout annuity need to behave similarly to the
4\% rule? In this case it turns out to be close to 1.25\%! That's
significantly lower than even the most conservative returns on any
portfolio, even accounting for inflation. How does this number come
about?

## Inflation-aware payout annuity

To get a more nuanced view of payout annuity, let's modify our initial
assumptions. We know that we can account for risk partially by
reducing our interest rate number $r$; but to account for inflation,
we probably can't apply the same principle.

Why? Risk directly affects our annual rate of return $r$; thus, even
if there's variability in $r$, we know that there's going to be some
value of $r$ that fits our "investment growth + risk" curve semi-well.

On the other hand, inflation doesn't affect the growth of our
portfolio at all. If inflation is 2.5% one year and our portfolio
grows 4.5%, our portfolio is still worth 104.5\% its value from last
year. Inflation instead affects only our withdrawal rate: If we
withdrew $W_{t-1}$ last year and inflation was 2.5\%, then our new
annual expenses will be around 102.5\% of $W_{t-1}$.

Let's model this by introducing a new *inflation rate*, $i$, into our
model:

$$P_t = (1+r) P_{t-1} - (1 + i)^t W$$

We can similarly solve for $P$ using $P_T$:

$$
\begin{aligned}
  P_T &= 0 = (1+r) P_{T-1} + (1+i)^T W \\\\
      &... \\\\
      &= P (1+r)^T - \sum_{t=0}^{T-1} (1+r)^t (1+i)^{T-t} W \\\\
  \iff P &= W \frac{\sum_{t=0}^{T-1} (1+r)^t (1+i)^{T-t}}{(1+r)^T}
\end{aligned}
$$

The series $\sum_{t=0}^{T-1} (1+r)^t(1+i)^{T-t}$ is a bit more
complicated than our previous term. I actually looked around online to
see if there was a simpler representation of the sum; unfortunately I
couldn't really find anything. I'd love to learn if there is some
simpler representation, as an analytical term could give us a bit more
insight into how this function behaves.

Nonetheless, this derivation gives us a means of calculating an
inflation-aware payout number. Let's use $r=4.25\\%$ and $i=2\\%$, a
semi-reasonable number for the growth of our portfolio assuming that
we have a good amount invested in more risk-averse options and that
the inflation rate stops going crazy and holds at around 2\% fvor the
next 30 years.

Assuming the same \\$72,000 initial withdrawal rate per year, the
inflation-aware principal we would need to survive for 30 years is
around \\$1.57M. Note that this is *still* lower than the 4\% rule
number of \\$1.8M; but we can now analyze what the 4\% rule probably
assumed when building the intial model.

For example, let's keep our inflation rate at 2\%. For the
inflation-aware payout annuity to match the 4\% rule, it generates a
similar starting amount to the 4\% rule at $r=3.24\\%$, which is
significantly lower than our original conservative estimate.

### Model insights

One of the advantages of analytical modeling is that we can often use
it to learn about relationships between variables.

For example, one major question I had (which arguably prompted this
analysis) was if the 4\% rule worked regardless of the yearly
withdrawal rate $W$. In other words, if I need \\$1.8M to spend an
inflation-adjusted \\$72,000 anually, do I need \\$18M to spend
\\$720,000 annually? Sometimes these simple rules are based on the
unstated assumption of some "regular" spending range, and may not
necessarily have a linear relationship.

Fortunately, if we look at the relationship between $P$ and $W$ in
both of our payout annuity models, we see that there is a linear
relationship and thus the 4\% relationship actually does hold no
matter what your withdrawal rate is.

One factor that does affect our 4\% number, though, is the number of
years we plan to be retired. Someone at age 30 may need to plan to
retire in 70 years for example -- how much would they need to save?

Interestingly, if we fix $r$ and $i$ on our model to those that
matched the 4% rule, we can actually get basic multiplier that can be
used in your own Excel spreadsheets:

| # of Years | Initial Withdrawal % |
|------------|----------------------|
| 5          | 20.74%               |
| 10         | 10.68%               |
| 15         | 7.34%                |
| 20         | 5.66%                |
| 25         | 4.66%                |
| 30         | 4.00%                |
| 35         | 3.53%                |
| 40         | 3.17%                |
| 45         | 2.90%                |
| 50         | 2.68%                |
| 55         | 2.51%                |
| 60         | 2.36%                |
| 65         | 2.24%                |
| 70         | 2.13%                |
| 75         | 2.04%                |
| 80         | 1.96%                |

Of course, these numbers are about as nonsensical as the original "4%"
rule of thumb. The point is that depending on how long you plan to be
retired, there's going to be a significant amount of variability in
your planned final retirement number.

For example: an individual who plans to retire at age 30 could very
well live to 80; in that case, our numbers suggest that they would
need **\\$2.54M to retire** at the same time as someone at 50 with the
same exact spending plans; a far cry from the initial \\$1.8M that the
4% rule suggested they needed.

The final insight -- which I haven't really researched to closely yet
-- is that it's actually possible to model my inflation-aware payout
annuity model using:

$$\text{PV}(1-\frac{1+i}{1+r}, T, W)$$

Ironically this was actually the number I used to "approximate" the
effect of inflation before I had properly derived a model with
inflation explicitly included.

I've tested this in a number of scenarios by changing $r$, $i$, $T$
and $W$ and have found that the difference between my inflation-aware
payout annuity and this adjusted $\text{PV}$ tends to be nearly
identical, and linear in $T$ (i.e., the difference isn't massive but
grows linearly as $T$ grows). I found this especially interesting, as
it suggests that perhaps there isn't any loss in representability by
using the above term rather than my "proper" inflation-adjusted
solution for $P$; it's so good, in fact, that I'd recommend anyone
interested in experimenting with this should use the above $\text{PV}$
term instead simply because it's easier to write in Excel.

## Limitations

Nearly every "rule of thumb" or simplified model approach exists
primarily to give us insights, provide ballparks, and understand more
deeply the assumptions we make when we start to forecast estimates.

Trusting these models implicitly can be dangerous. Finance is highly
complicated, incredibly variable and thus hard to predict in
perpetuity; I'd highly recommend readers here play around with some of
these models to see just how sensitive they are to the input numbers
(particularly, inflation and interest).

If you do have any feedback on this article or related links, feel
free to DM me on Reddit
([/u/cacrawford](https://reddit.com/u/cacrawford)). I'd love to hear
about any similar types of models or better derivations.
